============
Introduction
============

.. note::

   The following section is a modified version of Section 3 from `Codilean et al. 2022 <https://doi.org/10.5194/essd-14-3695-2022>`_


Cosmogenic radionuclide (CRN) exposure dating (`Granger et al., 2013 <https://doi.org/10.1130/B30774.1>`_; `Schaefer et al., 2022 <https://doi.org/10.1038/s43586-022-00096-9>`_), luminescence dating (`Rhodes, 2011 <https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-earth-040610-133425>`_; `Murray et al., 2021 <https://doi.org/10.1038/s43586-021-00068-5>`_), and radiocarbon dating (`Hajdas et al., 2021 <https://doi.org/10.1038/s43586-021-00058-7>`_) are geochronological techniques that are the most widely applicable to the recent geological past. All three of the techniques allow determination of the deposition age of sediments and associated materials, and cosmogenic radionuclides can also be used to quantify the rate at which landforms or landscapes are lowered by physical and chemical erosion processes. The three techniques have made important contributions to the reconstruction of past environments (`Roberts et al., 2001 <https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1060264>`_; `Singhvi and Porat, 2008 <https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1502-3885.2008.00058.x>`_; `Balco, 2019 <https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-earth-081619-052609>`_; `Hocknull et al., 2020 <https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-15785-w>`_), and CRN and luminescence dating have revolutionised the field of quantitative geomorphology (`Granger and Schaller, 2014 <https://doi.org/10.2113/gselements.10.5.369>`_; `Dixon and Riebe, 2014 <https://doi.org/10.2113/gselements.10.5.363>`_; `Guralnik et al., 2015 <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.quageo.2014.09.001>`_; `King et al., 2016 <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.quageo.2016.01.004>`_). Radiocarbon dating, luminescence dating, and (to some extent) CRN exposure dating have also made substantial contributions to archaeology (`Akcar et al., 2008 <https://doi.org/10.3285/eg.57.1-2.9>`_; Renfrew, 2011; `Roberts et al., 2015 <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2015.02.028>`_), including to the debates on the timing of human evolution and migration (`Granger et al., 2015 <https://doi.org/10.1038/nature14268>`_; `Clarkson et al., 2017 <https://doi.org/10.1038/nature22968>`_; `Jacobs et al., 2019 <https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0843-2>`_; `Zilhão et al., 2020 <https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0843-2>`_; `Crabtree et al., 2021 <https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-021-01106-8>`_).

Like most geochronological techniques, the three dating techniques require specialised training, laboratories, and equipment, and they involve lengthy and costly sample preparation procedures. As a result, studies relying on CRN, luminescence, or radiocarbon techniques will often produce relatively small datasets (n<100) that address very specific research questions and focus on relatively small study areas. Furthermore, the lack of formal reporting standards (`Schaefer et al., 2022 <https://doi.org/10.1038/s43586-022-00096-9>`_; `Murray et al., 2021 <https://doi.org/10.1038/s43586-021-00068-5>`_; `Hajdas et al., 2021 <https://doi.org/10.1038/s43586-021-00058-7>`_) coupled with the disconnect that exists in some cases between the researchers collecting the samples and interpreting the ages and/or rates and the researchers preparing the samples and undertaking the measurements means that the techniques often produce datasets that are unmanaged. These datasets may become forgotten once the study has been completed and results are published, and they may not include sufficient levels of supporting information for the quality of the raw data to be easily determined or for the raw data to be reusable with confidence -- for example, in instances where data need to be recalculated due to updated measurement standards and/or data reduction protocols. The above limitations mean that carefully curated compilations of CRN, luminescence, and radiocarbon data are necessary to allow for larger-scale synoptic studies and instances where the quality rating of ages/denudation rates is desirable; moreover, carefully curated compilations of these data are critical to ensuring the longevity and value of often irreplaceable legacy data.

Here, we describe the upgraded and updated version of the database -- OCTOPUS v.2. The application part of the database has been extensively rewritten, and it is now running on the Google Cloud Platform (https://cloud.google.com, last access: 4 May 2023). The data are stored in a relational database, and the data collections have been extended to include a global collection of CRN exposure ages on glacial landforms; an Australian collection of OSL and TL ages from aeolian and lacustrine sedimentary archives; OSL, TL, and radiocarbon ages from Sahul (Australia, New Guinea, and the Aru Islands joined by lower sea levels) archaeological records; and a collection of late-Quaternary records of non-human vertebrate fauna fossil ages from Sahul. Supporting data are comprehensive and include bibliographic, contextual, and sample-preparation- and measurement-related information. In the case of fluvial sediment CRN data, the database also includes all necessary information and input files for the recalculation of denudation rates using CAIRN, an open-source program for calculating basin-wide denudation rates from 10Be and 26Al data (`Mudd et al., 2016 <https://doi.org/10.5194/esurf-4-655-2016>`_). Further, all CRN data have been recalculated and harmonised using the same program. OCTOPUS v.2 can be accessed at https://octopusdata.org (last access: 4 May 2023).